It is quite clear how our present is shaped by the recent Prehistory.
Today, most of our present socio-economic politics are grounded on a
Neolithic way of living (demography, production, ownership, residential
mobility, etc.); human images, extremely rare during Paleolithic, spread
during Neolithic times and represent today our main subject of interest;
most of modern Europeans belong to the haplogroup H (ca 40%) inherited
partly from Middle and Late Neolithic migrations; etc. Investigations on
gene-culture coevolution have become a major issue of prehistoric
studies. Until recently, narratives on ancient societies were the
prerogative of archaeologists and prehistorians but the development of
ancient DNA (aDNA), haplogroup (hg) studies, isotopes analysis,
paleoenvironmental and climatic sciences have opened a fertile dialogue
about the recognition of ancient cultures, their interactions, their
environmental adaptation and their evolution. To this day, gene-culture
coevolution studies benefit from a large amount of data and models
yearly renewed or refined (e.g. hg characterizations, climatic models,
radiocarbon calibration curves and dating) stored in databases or in
scientific publications. Prehistory itself has evolved by integrating
these scientific advances and by giving more importance to databases,
statistics and spatial analysis. This situation permits to go further in
the study of forces (genetic, cultural, environmental) that shape our
modern societies. 

To describe gene-culture coevolution, two
global dimensions of social groups can be distinguished: its genetic
identity and its cultural identity

# Theory

The identity of a social group is the conjunction of its cultural and
genetic identities. In traditional societies, the language barrier and
the cost of transport are the main factors to explain why genetic and
cultural transmissions are mostly vertical (between generations, on the
spot). Over time, autocorrelations appear between genetics, culture and
geography, for example: a new generation inherits its parents' language
(mother tongue) as it inherits its genes; two populations are all the
more genetically similar they are geographically close; the geographical
extension of a social group is the area where the association of its
genetic and cultural traits is higher than anywhere outside this area;
genetic and cultural distances between social groups will be all the
more important as these groups are separated by time and space; etc. The
map of present European nations is also the map of their genomic
proximities [@Novembre]: there are generally gradual differences (i.e.
linear gradient) between neighboring countries in terms of: genetics,
languages, kinship systems, etc. This 'continuity principle' permits to
ground gene-culture coevolution studies on parsimonious models:
population continuity, spatial friction, cultural consensus theories,
seriations, etc. Exceptions to this 'continuity principle' are very few.
Maybe the Basque population should be the best example [@Gunther].
Beside the importance of vertical transmission, some horizontal
transmissions could have been major triggers of social changes. In this
way, diffusion and adoption of innovations, with its new animal breeds,
vegetal landraces, weaving or ploughing techniques, prestigious goods,
etc., are only the most visible. All along the Neolithic, cultural
diffusion and trait-adoptions became increasingly significant, leading
to Bronze Age highly hierarchised societies and globalized economy
[@Kristiansen2014].

# Case studie: a colonisation

A current model for these diffusion/differentiation processes follows
these three phases:

1.  taking possession of a new territory: founder effect (loss of
    genetic diversity); opposition indigenous/incomers; incomers
    maintain links with their region of origin, perceptible, in
    particular, in common styles and long-distance exchanges;

2.  rooting and withdrawal: contacts with indigenous populations
    increase (admixture); selection of some cultural traits from
    indigenous and incomers backgrounds; contacts with the area of
    origin decrease, styles tends to lean towards regionalization;

3.  development and identity affirmation: a new social group appears;
    styles autonomy; the potential of the new territory is really
    exploited; long-distance exchanges restart;


# mtDNA, cultures and radiocarbon dates

R + Leaflet integration of ancient DNA (aDNA) data
